\input texinfo
@setfilename heirloom.info
@dircategory Heirloom Darwin port
@direntry
* Heirloom: (heirloom).       Downstream Darwin port of the Heirloom Project.
@end direntry
@settitle Heirloom Darwin Port

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2026 moonman81. Distributed under a per-file
patchwork of upstream licences.  This document is CC-BY-4.0.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title Heirloom Darwin Port
@subtitle Version 1.1.0-darwin-arm64, 2026-07-03
@author moonman81 <@email{i.am.moonman@@gmail.com}>
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Heirloom Darwin Port

This document is the Info-format index for the Heirloom Darwin port,
a downstream port of Gunnar Ritter's Heirloom Project to macOS 26.4
arm64.

@strong{Not authoritative.}  Upstream is
@url{http://heirloom.sourceforge.net/} (unmaintained since about 2008).
This port is for compatibility, not scholarship or production
reliance.

For per-tool documentation, run @command{man @var{tool}} against the
Heirloom man tree at @file{/opt/heirloom/share/man/5man/}.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::                What this port provides
* Modality::                Version, variant, and dialect axes
* Packages::                The five Heirloom packages
* Legacy::                  Backwards compatibility posture
* Provenance::              Chain of custody
* Bibliography::            Primary sources
* Colophon::                About this document
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview

The Heirloom Darwin port ships five packages:

@table @asis
@item @b{sh}
Ritter's SVR4-personality Bourne shell.  Backticks, no
@code{$(@dots{})}.  Historical semantics preserved.

@item @b{devtools}
@command{make} (SVR4 flavour), @command{sccs}, @command{yacc},
@command{lex}, @command{m4}.

@item @b{toolchest}
200+ POSIX/SVR4 utilities.  Each tool compiled into up to five
personality variants (default SVID3, POSIX/SUS, POSIX-2001/SUS3,
S42/SVID4-subset, UCB/BSD).

@item @b{doctools}
The Bell Labs troff preprocessor pipeline: @command{soelim} →
@command{refer} → @command{grap} → @command{pic} → @command{tbl} →
@command{eqn} → @command{troff}.

@item @b{pkgtools}
SVR4 package administration: @command{pkgadd}, @command{pkgrm},
@command{pkgchk}, @command{pkginfo}, @command{pkgmk}, @command{pkgproto},
@command{pkgtrans}.
@end table

Plus a shared workspace repo holding hardening artefacts, ALM
scaffolding, and QA reports.

@node Modality
@chapter Modality

Every installed binary honours three axes of behaviour:

@table @asis
@item VERSION
The port revision.  Reported by @option{--version}.  Pinnable via
@env{HEIRLOOM_PORT_VERSION_REQ}.

@item VARIANT
Which SVR4 personality binary is invoked.  Directory-based:
@file{$PREFIX/bin/@var{tool}} (SVID3 default),
@file{$PREFIX/bin/posix/@var{tool}} (SUS),
@file{$PREFIX/bin/posix2001/@var{tool}} (SUS3),
@file{$PREFIX/bin/s42/@var{tool}} (SVID4),
@file{$PREFIX/ucb/@var{tool}} (UCB/BSD),
@file{$PREFIX/ccs/bin/@var{tool}} (CCS).

@item DIALECT
Human-friendly synonym for VARIANT.  Recognised: @code{svid3},
@code{svr3}, @code{svr4}, @code{sysv}, @code{sysv3}, @code{posix},
@code{sus}, @code{sus2}, @code{posix2001}, @code{sus3}, @code{s42},
@code{svid4}, @code{ucb}, @code{bsd}, @code{ccs}.
@end table

Selection precedence (highest wins):

@enumerate
@item Command-line: @option{--variant=@var{name}} or
      @option{--dialect=@var{name}}
@item @env{HEIRLOOM_VARIANT}
@item @env{HEIRLOOM_DIALECT}
@item @env{SYSV3} (Ritter's classic SVID3 selector)
@item Compile-time default
@end enumerate

Full detail: @command{man 7 heirloom-modality}.

@node Packages
@chapter Packages

The five package repos are hosted at

@itemize
@item @url{https://github.com/moonman81/heirloom-sh-darwin}
@item @url{https://github.com/moonman81/heirloom-devtools-darwin}
@item @url{https://github.com/moonman81/heirloom-toolchest-darwin}
@item @url{https://github.com/moonman81/heirloom-doctools-darwin}
@item @url{https://github.com/moonman81/heirloom-pkgtools-darwin}
@item @url{https://github.com/moonman81/heirloom-workspace-darwin}
@end itemize

Each repo carries its own @file{README.md}, @file{PROVENANCE.md},
@file{BIBLIOGRAPHY.md}, @file{HOWTO.md}, and @file{NOTICE.md}.

@node Legacy
@chapter Legacy Compatibility Posture

The port preserves compatibility with prior-system artefacts:

@itemize
@item @command{cpio} — old-ASCII / new-ASCII / binary / character
      cpio format variants all readable and writable.
@item @command{tar} — v7 and USTAR tar formats.
@item @command{sccs} — all SCCS history file formats.
@item @command{pkgadd} — SVR4 package format v1 and v2.
@end itemize

Where a legacy format could not be preserved on Darwin, the reason
is documented per-tool.

@node Provenance
@chapter Provenance

Chain of custody:

@display
Bell Labs / AT&T  →  Sun (OpenSolaris)  →  Ritter (Heirloom Project)
    →  moonman81 (Darwin port, 2026)
@end display

Per-repo @file{PROVENANCE.md} has the full detail.

@node Bibliography
@chapter Bibliography

Primary sources are listed per-repo in @file{BIBLIOGRAPHY.md}.
Key references:

@itemize
@item Bourne, Stephen R. (1978). @cite{An Introduction to the UNIX Shell}.
@item Feldman, Stuart I. (1979). @cite{Make - A Program for Maintaining
      Computer Programs}.
@item Aho, Weinberger, Kernighan (1988). @cite{The AWK Programming Language}.
@item Ossanna, Joseph F. (1977). @cite{Troff User's Manual}.
@item Kernighan, Ritchie (1988). @cite{The C Programming Language}.
@item Sun Microsystems (1992). @cite{Application Packaging Developer's Guide}.
@end itemize

@node Colophon
@chapter Colophon

This Info document is a companion to the per-tool @command{man} pages.
For any tool, prefer the man page:

@example
man @var{tool}
@end example

or the modality reference:

@example
man 7 heirloom-modality
@end example

Info format is provided for readers who prefer it; the man pages
remain the authoritative documentation.

@bye
