.\" heirloom-port-bootstrap(7) — Heirloom Darwin port ALM
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 moonman81 (Heirloom Darwin port).
.\" Placed in the public domain (zlib-style: use freely, retain notice).
.TH HEIRLOOM-PORT-BOOTSTRAP 7 "2026-07-02" "Heirloom Darwin port" "Port ALM"
.SH NAME
heirloom-port-bootstrap \- install prerequisites for the Heirloom Project Darwin port
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B make bootstrap
.br
.B sh scripts/bootstrap.sh
.SH DESCRIPTION
Installs everything the
.B heirloom-workspace-darwin
port needs to build on macOS / Darwin:
.PP
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
Verifies the Xcode Command Line Tools are installed. If missing, invokes
the CLT installer and asks you to re-run
.B make bootstrap
after it completes.
.IP \(bu 2
Verifies Homebrew is installed. Refuses to auto-install brew (that is
a policy decision that belongs to you). If missing, prints the
canonical brew installer URL and stops.
.IP \(bu 2
Reads
.I scripts/prereqs-brew.txt
and installs every listed formula that is not already present. Idempotent.
.IP \(bu 2
Reads
.I scripts/prereqs-brew-optional.txt
(if present) and best-effort installs each formula; failures are
non-fatal.
.IP \(bu 2
Installs
.B pre-commit
and wires up the git hooks (
.B pre-commit install
+
.B pre-commit install --hook-type pre-push
).
.IP \(bu 2
Reads
.I scripts/prereqs-heirloom.txt
and verifies each companion Heirloom package is already installed at
the expected path. Missing packages produce a warning with clone /
build instructions.
.IP \(bu 2
Reports whether
.I /opt/heirloom
exists and is writable. If not, prints the exact
.B sudo
commands to create it once with the invoking user as owner.
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
None. All configuration lives in
.I scripts/prereqs-*.txt
files.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I scripts/prereqs-brew.txt
Required Homebrew formulae, one per line. Blank lines and lines
starting with
.B #
are ignored.
.TP
.I scripts/prereqs-brew-optional.txt
Optional Homebrew formulae. Failures are non-fatal.
.TP
.I scripts/prereqs-heirloom.txt
Companion Heirloom package check-paths, format
.BR pkg-name:/absolute/path .
.SH IDEMPOTENCY
Safe to re-run any number of times. Nothing is installed twice.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
All prerequisites satisfied.
.TP
.B >0
Xcode CLT or Homebrew missing; user action required.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR heirloom-port-configure (7),
.BR heirloom-port-install (7),
.BR heirloom-port-verify (7),
.BR heirloom-port-lifecycle (7),
.BR brew (1)
.SH NOTES
This is the port's own bootstrap script; the utilities inside the
port itself (
.BR sh (1),
.BR cpio (1),
.BR troff (1),
etc.) have their own upstream man pages installed under
.IR /opt/heirloom/share/man/5man .
