.\" heirloom-port-verify(7)
.TH HEIRLOOM-PORT-VERIFY 7 "2026-07-02" "Heirloom Darwin port" "Port ALM"
.SH NAME
heirloom-port-verify \- post-install smoke tests
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B make verify
.br
.B sh scripts/verify.sh
.RI "[" PREFIX "]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
Runs a package-specific set of smoke tests against the binaries
installed under
.IR PREFIX .
Confirms presence of flagship executables and exercises core
functionality without any assumptions about network or filesystem
state beyond what
.BR heirloom-port-install (7)
produced.
.PP
Package-specific coverage:
.PP
.RS 4
.IP "heirloom-sh" 4
sh + jsh presence; basic echo; parameter expansion; pipelines;
traditional Bourne enforcement ($(...) rejected, backticks work).
.IP "heirloom-devtools" 4
yacc + lex + m4 + make + sccs presence; yacc grammar-to-y.tab.c
smoke; lex .l-to-lex.yy.c smoke; m4 macro expansion; make hello.
.IP "heirloom-toolchest" 4
Core utility presence; personality directories (s42, posix, posix2001,
ucb) exist; oawk + nawk basic script; ISO 8601
.BR date ;
cpio + tar round-trip.
.IP "heirloom-doctools" 4
troff + nroff + tbl + eqn + pic + grap + refer + ptx + checknr +
soelim presence;
.B nroff -man
formats a manual page; troff produces intermediate output.
.IP "heirloom-pkgtools" 4
All pkgcmd binaries present; pkgparam reads pkginfo; PKCS#12
keystore round-trip via openssl(1) (PQ-ready: ML-KEM / ML-DSA /
SLH-DSA accepted transparently).
.IP "heirloom-workspace" 4
Flagship binary from every phase present; full roundtrip suite from
.I hardening/roundtrip/roundtrip.sh
executes cleanly.
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Every smoke test passed.
.TP
.B >0
One or more smoke tests failed; first failing test printed to stderr.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR heirloom-port-install (7),
.BR heirloom-port-lifecycle (7)
