.TH HEIRLOOM-MODALITY 7 "2026-07-03" "Heirloom Darwin port" "Port ALM"
.SH NAME
heirloom-modality \- version, variant and dialect controls for
Heirloom Darwin port binaries
.SH SYNOPSIS
Every tool built with
.B heirloom_flags.h
honours the same command-line switches and environment variables:
.PP
.RS
.B \-\-help
|
.B \-\-usage
|
.BR \-H            "  # invoke " man(1) " on the tool"
.br
.B \-\-version
|
.BR \-V            "  # print port banner (built + active variant)"
.br
.B \-\-variants                     "  # list personality variants installed"
.br
.B \-\-describe\-modality            "  # print this modality matrix"
.br
.BI \-\-variant= name              "  # re-exec into the named variant"
.br
.BI \-\-dialect= name              "  # human-friendly synonym for --variant"
.RE
.SH THREE AXES OF MODALITY
Each port artefact varies along three axes: VERSION, VARIANT, DIALECT.
.SS VERSION
.TP
The upstream Heirloom release + moonman81 port revision.
Reported by
.BR \-\-version .
Pinnable via
.BR HEIRLOOM_PORT_VERSION_REQ .
When
.B HEIRLOOM_PORT_VERSION_REQ
is set to a version string that does not match the running
port version, the tool exits with
.B EX_CONFIG
(78) before doing anything else. Useful for pinning scripts
to a known port revision.
.SS VARIANT
.TP
Which SVR4 personality binary is invoked.
Directory-based:
.RS
.br
.BI $PREFIX/bin/<tool>              "     default (SVID3)"
.br
.BI $PREFIX/bin/posix/<tool>        "     POSIX/SUS"
.br
.BI $PREFIX/bin/posix2001/<tool>    "     POSIX-2001/SUS3"
.br
.BI $PREFIX/bin/s42/<tool>          "     SVID4-subset"
.br
.BI $PREFIX/ucb/<tool>              "     UCB/BSD"
.br
.BI $PREFIX/ccs/bin/<tool>          "     CCS (make, yacc, m4, sccs)"
.RE
.PP
The shim in
.B heirloom_flags.h
detects the mismatch between the compile-time built variant of the
running binary and the requested variant, and
.BR execv (2)s
into the requested one. A marker environment variable
.B HEIRLOOM_ACTIVE_VARIANT
is set on re-exec to prevent infinite loops.
.SS DIALECT
.TP
A human-friendly synonym for VARIANT.
Understood dialect names and their variant mappings:
.RS
.br
.BR svid3 " | " svr3 " | " svr4 " | " sysv " | " sysv3 " → default"
.br
.BR posix " | " sus " | " sus2 "                        → posix"
.br
.BR posix2001 " | " sus3 "                              → posix2001"
.br
.BR s42 " | " svid4 "                                   → s42"
.br
.BR ucb " | " bsd "                                     → ucb"
.br
.BR ccs "                                              → ccs"
.RE
.SH SELECTION PRECEDENCE
Highest wins:
.IP 1. 4
Command-line
.BI \-\-variant= name
or
.BI \-\-dialect= name
.IP 2. 4
Environment
.B HEIRLOOM_VARIANT
.IP 3. 4
Environment
.B HEIRLOOM_DIALECT
.IP 4. 4
Environment
.B SYSV3
(Ritter's classic SVID3 selector)
.IP 5. 4
Compile-time default of the running binary
.SH LEGACY-FLAG PRESERVATION
Tools where the lowercase
.B \-h
or
.B \-v
is load-bearing (verbose in
.BR cp ,
.BR mv ,
.BR rm ,
.BR tar ,
.BR cpio ,
.BR grep ,
etc.; hash in
.BR sh (1))
pass the corresponding bit
.RB ( HF_H_TAKEN ,
.BR HF_VERBOSE_TAKEN )
to the
.B heirloom_flags()
call. In that case only the uppercase
.RB ( \-H ,
.BR \-V )
and the long form
.RB ( \-\-help ,
.BR \-\-version )
trigger the shim; the lowercase form flows through to the tool's
own getopt loop unchanged.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Get the manual page for a tool via the shim:
.B ls \-\-help
.TP
Check the port version:
.B pkgadd \-\-version
.TP
See which variants are installed for cp:
.B cp \-\-variants
.TP
Force ucb (BSD-flavour) behaviour for one invocation:
.B HEIRLOOM_DIALECT=bsd ls \-la
.TP
Same via long flag:
.B ls \-\-variant=ucb \-la
.TP
Pin a script to a specific port revision:
.B HEIRLOOM_PORT_VERSION_REQ=1.1.0-darwin-arm64 sh script.sh
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /opt/heirloom/share/man/5man/
Heirloom man tree. Also searched by the shim.
.TP
.I /opt/heirloom/share/doc/heirloom\-*/HOWTO.md
Per-repo narrative guide.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR heirloom-port-lifecycle (7),
.BR heirloom-port-install (7),
.BR heirloom-port-verify (7),
.BR sh (1),
.BR ls (1),
.BR cp (1)
.SH HISTORY
The modality shim was introduced in port revision 1.1.0-darwin-arm64,
2026-07-03. Legacy sh binaries built before that revision honour only
the built-in
.B SYSV3
selector.
